README.md, before:

---
title: "GenAI & LLM Documentation: Nuanced Natural Language Programming"
tags: ["genai-llm", "llm", "natural-language-programming", "systems-thinking", "technical-writing", "evaluation", "governance"]
---

# GenAI & LLM Documentation: Nuanced Natural Language Programming

This repository provides a practical framework for building real software and documentation workflows using Generative AI and Large Language Models (LLMs). It treats language as a technical surface and requires professional fluency across:

-   **Logic**: Understanding cause-and-effect, conditions, and invariants.
-   **Language**: Using precise, unambiguous wording for instructions and constraints.
-   **Systems**: Grasping the interconnectedness of components and the broader context.
-   **Sentences**: Structuring executable statements to guide AI actions.

GenAI & LLM Documentation is designed for real-world execution: product and user needs, constraints, trade-offs, review discipline, evaluation, and governance.

Most AI failures are not model failures. They are **human specification failures**. This documentation exists to make natural language execution reliable by teaching:

-   A repeatable **method** for expressing intent, encoding constraints, delegating safely to AI tools, and verifying outputs with evidence before acceptance.
-   **Execution patterns** and **professional scenarios** that demonstrate how to apply this method to common development tasks.
-   Guidance on **guardrails, governance, and evaluation** to ensure responsible and effective AI adoption.

---

## Get Started Here

This documentation is structured to be navigable by role and by need.

1.  **If you are new to GenAI & LLM Documentation**: Start with the foundational concepts.
    -   What is GenAI & LLM Documentation: `docs/00-handbook-introduction/what-is-genai-llm.md`
    -   The GenAI & LLM Documentation Map: `docs/00-handbook-introduction/genai-llm-map.md`

2.  **If you want to apply GenAI & LLM Documentation immediately**: Jump into the practical applications.
    -   The GenAI & LLM Documentation Method (how work gets done): `docs/01-handbook-core-method/the-genai-llm-loop.md`
    -   Execution Patterns (recipes for common tasks): `docs/02-execution-patterns/00-pattern-index.md`

### Quickstart: run GenAI & LLM Documentation on a real task

Pick a small, concrete task (e.g., "add a field to a REST API response").

1.  **Define Intent**: What is the precise goal? (e.g., "Add `lastLogin` timestamp to `/users/{id}` response.")
2.  **Define Constraints**: What are the non-negotiables? (e.g., "Timestamp must be ISO 8601, only visible to admins, update on every login.")
3.  **Generate**: Ask your AI to implement it.
4.  **Review**: Critically examine the output against your Intent and Constraints.
    -   Follow: `docs/01-handbook-core-method/review-and-interrogation.md`

Example:

-   ✅ Good GenAI & LLM Documentation intent (specific, testable)
    "Generate a TypeScript interface `User` with `id: string`, `name: string`, `email: string`. Add a new field `lastLogin: string` (ISO 8601 format) to this interface. Do not modify other fields."

-   ❌ Bad GenAI & LLM Documentation intent (ambiguous, unbounded)
    "Improve the User interface to include login details."

---

## Philosophy

GenAI & LLM Documentation assumes:

-   AI amplifies human capability, it does not replace accountability.
-   The quality of output depends on the quality of human input and review.
-   Clear, precise language is an executable interface.
-   Context and constraints are as important as the request itself.
-   Reliability comes from repeatable processes and evidence-based verification.

You will know GenAI & LLM Documentation is working when:

-   AI-generated outputs consistently meet your quality bar.
-   Development cycle times are reduced without sacrificing correctness.
-   Team members spend more time on high-value tasks and less on boilerplate.
-   Onboarding new developers to a codebase is faster due to clear specifications and generated documentation.

---

## Contribution & Community

This is an open-source project. We welcome contributions from:

-   **Engineers** building with GenAI
-   **Product Managers** defining AI-assisted products
-   **Technical Writers** documenting AI systems
-   **DevOps/Platform Engineers** automating with AI
-   **Anyone** working with LLMs in a professional capacity

Join the discussion on GitHub and help us build the definitive guide for practical GenAI & LLM Documentation!

---

## License

This project is licensed under the [MIT License](LICENSE).

---

## Last Reviewed / Last Updated

- Last reviewed: 2025-12-28
- Version: 0.1.0

Commit message:

Finalize handbook structure and navigation

README.md, after:

---
title: "GenAI & LLM Handbook: Nuanced Natural Language Programming"
tags: ["genai-llm", "llm", "natural-language-programming", "systems-thinking", "technical-writing", "evaluation", "governance"]
---

# GenAI & LLM Handbook: Nuanced Natural Language Programming

This repository provides a practical handbook for building real software and documentation workflows using Generative AI and Large Language Models (LLMs). It treats language as a technical surface and requires professional fluency across:

-   **Logic**: Understanding cause-and-effect, conditions, and invariants.
-   **Language**: Using precise, unambiguous wording for instructions and constraints.
-   **Systems**: Grasping the interconnectedness of components and the broader context.
-   **Sentences**: Structuring executable statements to guide AI actions.

GenAI & LLM Handbook is designed for real-world execution: product and user needs, constraints, trade-offs, review discipline, evaluation, and governance.

Most AI failures are not model failures. They are **human specification failures**. This handbook exists to make natural language execution reliable by teaching:

-   A repeatable **method** for expressing intent, encoding constraints, delegating safely to AI tools, and verifying outputs with evidence before acceptance.
-   **Execution patterns** and **professional scenarios** that demonstrate how to apply this method to common development tasks.
-   Guidance on **guardrails, governance, and evaluation** to ensure responsible and effective AI adoption.

---

## Get Started Here

This handbook is structured to be navigable by role and by need. Navigation order:

1.  Start Here: `docs/00-handbook-introduction/`
2.  Handbook Method: `docs/01-handbook-method/` (loop, artifacts, core skills, evaluation library)
3.  Execution Patterns: `docs/02-execution-patterns/`
4.  Professional Scenarios: `docs/03-professional-scenarios/`
5.  Tooling & Frameworks: `docs/04-tooling-and-frameworks/`
6.  Responsible AI: `docs/05-responsible-ai/`
7.  Foundations (reference background): `docs/foundations/`
8.  Templates: `docs/06-templates/`
9.  Meta: `docs/AGENTS.md`, `docs/CHANGELOG.md`, `docs/LICENSE.md`

1.  **If you are new to the GenAI & LLM Handbook**: Start with the foundational concepts.
    -   What is GenAI & LLM Handbook: `docs/00-handbook-introduction/what-is-genai-llm.md`
    -   The GenAI & LLM Map: `docs/00-handbook-introduction/genai-llm-map.md`

2.  **If you want to apply the GenAI & LLM Handbook immediately**: Jump into the practical applications.
    -   The GenAI & LLM Handbook Method (how work gets done): `docs/01-handbook-method/the-genai-llm-loop.md`
    -   Execution Patterns (recipes for common tasks): `docs/02-execution-patterns/00-pattern-index.md`
    -   Templates for artifacts and checklists: `docs/06-templates/00-templates-index.md`

### Quickstart: run the GenAI & LLM Handbook on a real task

Pick a small, concrete task (e.g., "add a field to a REST API response").

1.  **Define Intent**: What is the precise goal? (e.g., "Add `lastLogin` timestamp to `/users/{id}` response.")
2.  **Define Constraints**: What are the non-negotiables? (e.g., "Timestamp must be ISO 8601, only visible to admins, update on every login.")
3.  **Generate**: Ask your AI to implement it (use a structured generation request).
4.  **Review**: Critically examine the output against your Intent and Constraints.
    -   Follow: `docs/01-handbook-method/review-and-interrogation.md`

Example:

-   ✅ Good GenAI & LLM Documentation intent (specific, testable)
    "Generate a TypeScript interface `User` with `id: string`, `name: string`, `email: string`. Add a new field `lastLogin: string` (ISO 8601 format) to this interface. Do not modify other fields."

-   ❌ Bad GenAI & LLM Documentation intent (ambiguous, unbounded)
    "Improve the User interface to include login details."

---

## Philosophy

GenAI & LLM Documentation assumes:

-   AI amplifies human capability, it does not replace accountability.
-   The quality of output depends on the quality of human input and review.
-   Clear, precise language is an executable interface.
-   Context and constraints are as important as the request itself.
-   Reliability comes from repeatable processes and evidence-based verification.

You will know GenAI & LLM Documentation is working when:

-   AI-generated outputs consistently meet your quality bar.
-   Development cycle times are reduced without sacrificing correctness.
-   Team members spend more time on high-value tasks and less on boilerplate.
-   Onboarding new developers to a codebase is faster due to clear specifications and generated documentation.

---

## Contribution & Community

This is an open-source project. We welcome contributions from:

-   **Engineers** building with GenAI
-   **Product Managers** defining AI-assisted products
-   **Technical Writers** documenting AI systems
-   **DevOps/Platform Engineers** automating with AI
-   **Anyone** working with LLMs in a professional capacity

Join the discussion on GitHub and help us build the definitive guide for practical GenAI & LLM Documentation!

---

## License

This project is licensed under the [MIT License](LICENSE).

---

## Last Reviewed / Last Updated

- Last reviewed: 2025-12-28
- Version: 0.1.0
